Announcing Rust 1.80.0 (#1358)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: posts/2024-07-25-Rust-1.80.0.md

---
layout: post
title: "Announcing Rust 1.80.0"
author: The Rust Release Team
release: true
---

The Rust team is happy to announce a new version of Rust, 1.80.0. Rust is a programming language empowering everyone to build reliable and efficient software.

If you have a previous version of Rust installed via `rustup`, you can get 1.80.0 with:

```console
$ rustup update stable
```

If you don't have it already, you can [get `rustup`](https://www.rust-lang.org/install.html) from the appropriate page on our website, and check out the [detailed release notes for 1.80.0](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/releases.html#version-1800-2024-07-25).

If you'd like to help us out by testing future releases, you might consider updating locally to use the beta channel (`rustup default beta`) or the nightly channel (`rustup default nightly`). Please [report](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/new/choose) any bugs you might come across!

## What's in 1.80.0 stable

> ### `LazyCell` and `LazyLock`

Reviewer: Is it worth mentioning `lazy_static` or `once_cell::sync::Lazy` here since it replaces those usecases?

> These "lazy" types delay the initialization of their data until first access. They are similar to the `OnceCell` and `OnceLock` types [stabilized in 1.70](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2023/06/01/Rust-1.70.0.html#oncecell-and-oncelock), but with the initialization function included in the type.

Reviewer 2: To reduce type-vs-value confusion:

```suggestion
These "lazy" types delay the initialization of their data until first access. They are similar to the `OnceCell` and `OnceLock` types [stabilized in 1.70](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2023/06/01/Rust-1.70.0.html#oncecell-and-oncelock), but with the initialization function included in the cell.
```

> These "lazy" types delay the initialization of their data until first access. They are similar to the `OnceCell` and `OnceLock` types [stabilized in 1.70](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2023/06/01/Rust-1.70.0.html#oncecell-and-oncelock), but with the initialization function included in the cell.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These "lazy" types delay the initialization of their data until first access. They are similar to the `OnceCell` and `OnceLock` types [stabilized in 1.70](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2023/06/01/Rust-1.70.0.html#oncecell-and-oncelock), but with the initialization function included in the cell. This completes the stabilization of functionality adopted into the standard library from the popular [`lazy_static`](https://crates.io/crates/lazy-static) and [`once_cell`](https://crates.io/crates/once_cell) crates.
```

> `LazyLock` is the thread-safe option, making it suitable for places like `static` values. For example, both the `spawn` thread and the main `scope` will see the exact same duration below, since `LAZY_TIME` will be initialized once, by whichever ends up accessing the static first. Neither use has to know *how* to initialize it though, like you would with `OnceLock::get_or_init`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`LazyLock` is the thread-safe option, making it suitable for places like `static` values. For example, both the `spawn` thread and the main `scope` will see the exact same duration below, since `LAZY_TIME` will be initialized once, by whichever ends up accessing the static first. Neither use has to know *how* to initialize it, unlike they would with `OnceLock::get_or_init()`.
```

```rust
use std::sync::LazyLock;
use std::time::Instant;

static LAZY_TIME: LazyLock<Instant> = LazyLock::new(Instant::now);

fn main() {
    let start = Instant::now();
    std::thread::scope(|s| {
        s.spawn(|| {
            println!("Thread lazy time is {:?}", LAZY_TIME.duration_since(start));
        });
        println!("Main lazy time is {:?}", LAZY_TIME.duration_since(start));
    });
}
```

> `LazyCell` does the same thing without thread synchronization, so it doesn't implement `Sync` needed for `static`, but it can still be used in `thread_local!` statics (with distinct initialization per thread). Either type can also be used in other data structures as well, depending on thread-safety needs, so lazy initialization is available everywhere!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`LazyCell` does the same thing without thread synchronization, so it doesn't implement `Sync`, which is needed for `static`, but it can still be used in `thread_local!` statics (with distinct initialization per thread). Either type can also be used in other data structures as well, depending on thread-safety needs, so lazy initialization is available everywhere!
```

    rayon::join(
        || println!("Hello, Thing One!"),
        || println!("Hello, Thing Two!"),
    );
}
```

```console
warning: unexpected `cfg` condition value: `crayon`
 --> src/main.rs:4:11
  |
4 |     #[cfg(feature = "crayon")]
  |           ^^^^^^^^^^--------
  |                     |
  |                     help: there is a expected value with a similar name: `"rayon"`
  |
  = note: expected values for `feature` are: `rayon`
  = help: consider adding `crayon` as a feature in `Cargo.toml`
  = note: see <https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/rustc/check-cfg/cargo-specifics.html> for more information about checking conditional configuration
  = note: `#[warn(unexpected_cfgs)]` on by default
```

The same warning is reported regardless of whether the actual `rayon` feature is enabled or not.

The `[lints]` table in the `Cargo.toml` manifest can also be used to extend the list of known names and values for custom `cfg`. `rustc` automatically provides [the syntax](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustc/check-cfg.html#specifying-expected-names-and-values) to use in the warning.

```toml
[lints.rust]
unexpected_cfgs = { level = "warn", check-cfg = ['cfg(foo, values("bar"))'] }
```

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

You can read more about this feature in a [previous blog post](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2024/05/06/check-cfg.html) announcing the availability of the feature on nightly.

```

- [`Duration::div_duration_f32`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/time/struct.Duration.html#method.div_duration_f32)
- [`Duration::div_duration_f64`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/time/struct.Duration.html#method.div_duration_f64)
- [`Option::take_if`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/option/enum.Option.html#method.take_if)
- [`Seek::seek_relative`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/io/trait.Seek.html#method.seek_relative)
- [`BinaryHeap::as_slice`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/collections/struct.BinaryHeap.html#method.as_slice)
- [`NonNull::offset`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/ptr/struct.NonNull.html#method.offset)
- [`NonNull::byte_offset`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/ptr/struct.NonNull.html#method.byte_offset)
- [`NonNull::add`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/ptr/struct.NonNull.html#method.add)
- [`NonNull::byte_add`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/ptr/struct.NonNull.html#method.byte_add)
- [`NonNull::sub`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/ptr/struct.NonNull.html#method.sub)
- [`NonNull::byte_sub`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/ptr/struct.NonNull.html#method.byte_sub)

> - [`NonNull:offset_from`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/ptr/struct.NonNull.html#method.offset_from)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [`NonNull::offset_from`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/ptr/struct.NonNull.html#method.offset_from)
```

- [`NonNull::align_offset`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/ptr/struct.NonNull.html#method.align_offset)
- [`<[T]>::split_at_checked`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/primitive.slice.html#method.split_at_checked)
- [`<[T]>::split_at_mut_checked`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/primitive.slice.html#method.split_at_mut_checked)
- [`str::split_at_checked`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/primitive.str.html#method.split_at_checked)
- [`str::split_at_mut_checked`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/primitive.str.html#method.split_at_mut_checked)
- [`str::trim_ascii`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/primitive.str.html#method.trim_ascii)
- [`str::trim_ascii_start`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/primitive.str.html#method.trim_ascii_start)
- [`str::trim_ascii_end`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/primitive.str.html#method.trim_ascii_end)
- [`<[AsciiChar]>::trim_ascii`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/core/primitive.slice.html#method.trim_ascii)
- [`<[AsciiChar]>::trim_ascii_start`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/core/primitive.slice.html#method.trim_ascii_start)

> - [`<[AsciiChar]>::trim_ascii_end`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/core/primitive.slice.html#method.trim_ascii_end)

Reviewer 4: `AsciiChar` is not being stabilized yet, did you mean `[u8]`?

Author: Looks like it, yeah. I copied this list from `rust/RELEASES.md`, so could you send both fixes there too?

> - [`<[AsciiChar]>::trim_ascii`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/core/primitive.slice.html#method.trim_ascii)
> - [`<[AsciiChar]>::trim_ascii_start`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/core/primitive.slice.html#method.trim_ascii_start)
> - [`<[AsciiChar]>::trim_ascii_end`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/core/primitive.slice.html#method.trim_ascii_end)

Author: ```suggestion
- [`<[u8]>::trim_ascii`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/core/primitive.slice.html#method.trim_ascii)
- [`<[u8]>::trim_ascii_start`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/core/primitive.slice.html#method.trim_ascii_start)
- [`<[u8]>::trim_ascii_end`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/core/primitive.slice.html#method.trim_ascii_end)
```
